Hi from Tokyo Japan, and welcome to Jeremy’s
IT Lab. In this video we’re covering another
recent addition to the CCNA exam, Terraform. The
exam blueprint previously listed Ansible, Puppet,
and Chef as the configuration management tools
you need to know for the exam. Cisco recently
changed that to Ansible and Terraform. However
I’m keeping Puppet and Chef in the course for
two reasons. First, notice the wording of the
new exam topic: Recognize the capabilities
of configuration management mechanisms,
“such as” Ansible and Terraform. For me,
the words “such as” imply that there could be
others on the exam. Second, Puppet and Chef
help illustrate key concepts, like comparing the
agentless architecture of Ansible and Terraform
to the agent-based architecture of Puppet and
Chef. So instead of modifying the previous video,
I’m adding this new one to focus on Terraform.
Before we get started, let me take a minute to
shill my books, Acing the CCNA Exam volumes
1 and 2. These books cover everything on the
latest version of the CCNA exam, including the
topics of this video. The very final chapter,
chapter 25 of volume 2, focuses on Ansible
and Terraform, and also includes a bit about
Puppet and Chef. I always recommend using books in
combination with a video course, so if you want to
get my books, check out the links on the screen
now to buy them directly from the publisher,
or find them on Amazon. Now let’s get started.
So, what are we going to cover in this video?
Of course, the focus is on Terraform, but
I’ll take the opportunity to introduce a few
new concepts. Specifically, we’ll talk about
the concept of infrastructure as code, IaC;
Terraform and the other tools we’ve covered
are examples of IaC. Then we’ll compare
infrastructure provisioning and configuration
management. Whereas Ansible is primarily used
for configuration management, Terraform leans
toward provisioning. We’ll then cover the
concepts of mutable vs immutable infrastructure,
and procedural vs declarative approaches. Finally,
we’ll shift our focus to Terraform itself
and cover its basics. Okay, let’s begin.
First let’s look at the concept of infrastructure
as code. Actually, we’ve already covered it,
I just didn’t use the specific term in
the last video. Infrastructure as code,
IaC, is the practice of provisioning and
managing infrastructure, such as servers,
networks, and cloud resources, using
machine-readable configuration files,
code, instead of manual configuration via
CLI or GUI. That probably sounds familiar,
because Ansible, Puppet, and Chef are examples of
IaC configuration management tools. For example,
Ansible manages device configurations using
several files that are used by the control
node. We covered these in the previous
video. Ansible uses playbook, inventory,
template, and variable files. Ansible runs on
the control node and uses these files to manage
the infrastructure. Instead of configuring the
devices via the CLI or GUI, their configurations
are managed via these code files, hence the
term “infrastructure as code”. Terraform,
on the other hand, is an IaC-based provisioning
tool that automates the creation of infrastructure
resources. In the next slide I’ll clarify the
difference between configuration management and
provisioning, but Terraform is primarily used for
provisioning. So, to summarize, infrastructure as
code automates infrastructure deployment and
management, ensuring consistency, scalability,
and repeatability. Basically, the various benefits
of automation that we covered in previous videos.
So, I mentioned that Ansible, Puppet, and Chef are
primarily configuration management tools, whereas
Terraform is primarily a provisioning tool. Let’s
clarify what the difference is. First, what is
configuration management? Tools like Ansible,
Puppet, and Chef manage existing infrastructure
by installing software, configuring settings, and
maintaining system state. This ensures consistency
by applying and enforcing configurations across
multiple devices. Again, these are the benefits
of Ansible, Puppet, and Chef that I covered
in the previous video. As for infrastructure
provisioning, it creates, modifies, and deletes
infrastructure resources such as servers and
network infrastructure. For example, creating
virtual servers and routers on a cloud platform
like AWS. But the focus is on initial setup
rather than ongoing configuration management.
To summarize, configuration management tools work
on already existing systems, whereas provisioning
tools build infrastructure from scratch. Of
course, these tools can be used together.
For example, Terraform, a provisioning tool,
and Ansible, a configuration management tool,
often work as a pair. Terraform
provisions infrastructure, creating VMs,
network infrastructure, storage, and other
resources, while Ansible provides ongoing
configuration and management, maintaining
those systems. With all of that said,
both Terraform and Ansible have some overlap. Each
can perform both provisioning and configuration
management to some extent. But their strengths
are different, so they’re often used together.
One major difference between infrastructure
provisioning and management tools is the
approach they take with the infrastructure:
is the infrastructure mutable or immutable?
Configuration management tools typically
use a mutable infrastructure approach. This
means that infrastructure can be modified after
deployment, such as applying updates, patches,
or configuration changes. In other words, changes
are made in place, meaning existing resources are
updated rather than replaced. This is just like
when you manually modify a device’s configuration
in the CLI. So, when using a mutable approach,
if you want to update the config of this VM,
Ansible or a similar tool would simply update the
config while leaving the VM itself in place. Only
the relevant settings are changed. So, what’s
the alternative to mutable infrastructure?
Provisioning tools like Terraform typically
employ an immutable infrastructure approach.
This means that infrastructure cannot be changed
after deployment. So, any changes you make involve
replacing the previous resource with a new one. If
you want to update the configuration of this VM,
Terraform or a similar tool would have to
create an updated instance of the VM with
the configuration changes applied, and then
destroy the old instance. One benefit of this
approach is that there is no configuration drift.
Each deployment starts from a fresh, predefined
state. There’s no opportunity for individual
changes to accumulate with each configuration.
Configuration drift isn’t a major issue when
Ansible or other mutable infrastructure tools
are properly managed. But Terraform’s immutable
approach virtually eliminates the risk altogether
The final concept we’ll cover before focusing
on Terraform itself is the difference between
a procedural and declarative approach. Some
tools take a procedural approach to managing
infrastructure, also called an imperative
approach. This means that the tool follows
explicit steps in a specific order to achieve the
desired outcome. So the user, the engineer using
the tool, must define each specific action in the
correct order to configure the infrastructure.
This provides greater control than the declarative
approach we’ll cover next, but is more demanding
on the user. They have to know exactly which steps
are required to achieve their desired end result,
and in which order those steps should be
executed. Then there is the declarative approach,
which defines the desired end state instead
of the specific steps. The tool itself,
such as Terraform, figures out the steps needed to
achieve the goal. This makes it easier to maintain
and ensure consistency across deployments because
the user doesn’t have to worry about ordering
individual commands and configurations on each
platform. They only have to think about defining
what they want the final result to be. So, to
summarize, A procedural approach focuses on how
to make changes with explicit steps. For example,
when configuring a new router, configure the
router’s hostname with HOSTNAME R1. Configure the
IP address of G0/1 with the IP ADDRESS command.
Enable the interface with NO SHUTDOWN, , and
so on. These are the specific configurations
needed on a Cisco router, and the steps would be
different if it was a Juniper router, for example.
A declarative approach, on the other hand, focuses
on what the final state should be. You can tell
Terraform “Create a router named R1 with IP
address 192.168.1.1/24 on its G0/1 interface,
ensuring the interface is enabled”. Terraform
should then figure out the necessary steps to
achieve that end state. So, I’ve mentioned
that Terraform uses a declarative approach,
but you’re probably wondering about the others.
Here’s a table. I’ve categorized Ansible and
Chef as procedural, but it’s worth noting that
they do have some declarative elements as well,
especially Ansible. People who use Ansible
a lot might get angry at me for categorizing
Ansible as procedural. But Red Hat, the
company that owns and develops Ansible,
also says it is procedural, so for your CCNA
studies I’d say it’s best to consider Ansible
a procedural tool. Meanwhile, Terraform
and Puppet use a declarative approach,
allowing you to define the desired end state
and let the tool figure out the rest for you.
Finally let’s move on to Terraform, which is an
open-source IaC tool developed by HashiCorp, an
American company that was acquired by IBM in 2025.
As I’ve mentioned a few times, it is primarily
a provisioning tool, focused on deploying
infrastructure resources on various cloud and
on-prem platforms. In Terraform, these platforms
are called providers and include AWS, Azure,
GCP, Kubernetes, and many more; it supports over
1000 different providers. For CCNA students, this
includes integrations with Cisco platforms like
Catalyst Center, ACI, which is Application Centric
Infrastructure, Cisco’s data center SDN solution.
And IOS XE, which is the type of IOS you’ll find
on modern Cisco devices like Catalyst switches.
Like Ansible, Terraform uses a push model and
is agentless. It doesn’t require a software agent
on infrastructure it provisions or manages. Okay,
now let’s see how Terraform actually works. At
the core of Terraform is Terraform Core; this is
the main Terraform software, typically running on
a Linux server, that processes configurations and
interacts with providers. An engineer creates
Terraform configuration files, which specify
the desired end state in a declarative fashion.
It’s up to Terraform Core to take that desired
end state and deploy the necessary infrastructure
on the appropriate provider or providers, such as
deploying cloud resources on AWS. It does this via
each provider’s APIs. And one more key element is
the state file, which Terraform uses to track the
state of the deployed infrastructure. By comparing
the current state of the infrastructure
to the desired end state defined in the
configuration files, Terraform can identify which
actions it needs to take, and in which order,
to achieve the desired result. To summarize,
these are Terraform’s four key components,
all working together to provision and manage
infrastructure: Terraform Core, the core software
developed by HashiCorp. Configuration files,
which an engineer creates to define the desired
end state of the infrastructure. The state
file, which tracks the current state of the
deployed infrastructure. And the providers, the
platforms on which the infrastructure is deployed.
Let’s cover a few more key points about Terraform.
The basic Terraform workflow consists of three
main steps. The first is “write”, in
which you define the desired end state
of your infrastructure resources in configuration
files. The second step is “plan,” where Terraform
analyzes your configuration files and shows you
exactly what changes will be made. This lets
you review and confirm the changes before applying
them. And the third step is apply, where Terraform
executes the plan to provision and manage the
infrastructure resources. That’s basically how it
works. If you think back to Ansible, hopefully you
remember that Ansible itself is written in Python,
while its playbooks are written in YAML. So
what about Terraform? While Terraform Core is
written in Go, the configuration files that
define the desired end state are written in
HashiCorp Configuration Language, HCL. HCL is
an example of a domain-specific language, DSL,
which is specialized for a particular purpose,
like Puppet’s DSL mentioned in the previous
video. Since DSLs are designed for specific
tasks, they make complex operations simpler,
and they require less effort compared to
general-purpose languages like Python or
Go. The downside is that HCL is another thing
you have to learn specifically to use Terraform,
but it’s relatively simple compared to learning
a full programming language. So, the key points
to remember here are the three steps of the
Terraform workflow: write, plan, and apply.
And also remember that Terraform Core is written
in Go, while the configuration files you make are
written in HashiCorp Configuration Language,
HCL, which is a Domain Specific Language.
Okay, those are the basics of Terraform. Now
here’s a one-slide summary before we move on to
the quiz. Infrastructure as Code is the practice
of provisioning and managing infrastructure using
machine-readable configuration files instead
of manual configuration. Ansible, Puppet,
Chef, and Terraform are all examples of IaC
tools. But not all IaC tools are used for the
exact same purpose. Configuration management
tools like Ansible, Puppet, and Chef focus on
managing existing infrastructure, doing things
like installing software, configuring settings,
and generally maintaining the state of your
systems. Infrastructure provisioning tools like
Terraform, on the other hand, focus on creating,
modifying, and deleting infrastructure resources.
That doesn’t mean that Ansible can’t be used to
provision resources or Terraform can’t be used to
make configuration changes, it’s just that each
tool is better fit for a different purpose. We
then covered mutable infrastructure, which means
that the infrastructure can be modified after
deployment. And immutable infrastructure, meaning
that it cannot be changed after deployment. Any
changes involve replacing the previous resource
with a new, updated version, and then deleting the
old one. Provisioning tools like Terraform use an
immutable approach, whereas management tools like
Ansible use a mutable approach to infrastructure.
We then compared the procedural and declarative
approaches. A procedural, also called imperative,
approach follows explicit steps in a specific
order to achieve the desired outcome, and these
steps must be specified by the engineer using the
tool. A declarative approach defines the desired
end state, and the IaC tool, such as Terraform,
figures out the steps needed to achieve that goal,
and in which order they should be executed. Okay,
finally we looked at Terraform itself, it’s an
open-source IaC tool developed by HashiCorp. It’s
primarily a provisioning tool used for deploying
infrastructure on providers like AWS, Azure,
GCP, Kubernetes, etc. Terraform interacts with
these providers via their APIs. Like Ansible,
it uses a push model and is agentless. Its main
components are Terraform Core, the configuration
files where you specify the desired end state,
the state file that tracks the current state of
the infrastructure, and the providers. The basic
workflow consists of three main steps: write,
plan, and apply. You could also add a fourth step
there: destroy, in which you delete the resources
after they are no longer needed. But these three
are considered the main steps. Terraform Core is
written in Go, and the configuration files are
written in HashiCorp Configuration Language,
which is a domain-specific language. Alright,
that’s what we covered in this video. Just a
very high-level overview of Terraform, but
as long as you know these basics you should
be ready for the CCNA exam. Now let’s do
a short quiz to test your understanding.
Here’s quiz question 1. Which of
the following are characteristics
of Terraform? (select two) Pause the
video now to think about your answers.
Okay, the answers are B, declarative, and
C, immutable infrastructure. Terraform
uses a declarative approach in which
you specify the desired end state and
Terraform takes care of the rest for you.
It also uses immutable infrastructure,
where a particular resource can’t be changed after
provisioning. To change a resource, Terraform will
deploy a new version of the resource and then
delete the old one instead. Okay, next question.
Here’s question 2. What are the three
main steps of the Terraform workflow?
Pause the video now to think about your answer.
Okay, the answer is D, write, plan, apply. In
the write step, you define the desired state of
your infrastructure in configuration files. In
the plan step you verify the changes that will
be executed before applying them. And then
in apply, Terraform applies whatever changes
necessary to bring the infrastructure in line with
the desired state. Now let’s do one more question.
Here’s quiz question 3. Which of the
following IaC tools are focused on
configuration management? Select three. Pause
the video now to think about your answers.
Okay, the answers are A, C, and D. Ansible, Chef,
and Puppet are primarily used for configuration
management, whereas Terraform is a provisioning
tool. To take advantage of the strengths of
each, it’s fairly common to use a combination,
such as Terraform and Ansible. These tools
aren’t exclusive and can be used together.
Okay, that’s all for this video. We covered some
additional concepts related to Infrastructure
as Code that weren’t covered in the
previous video, and then focused on
the basics of Terraform, a very popular
IaC provisioning tool. For the CCNA exam,
I recommend knowing the basics of Terraform
introduced in this video. You should also
be able to compare and contrast it with the
other tools we covered in the previous video:
Ansible, Puppet, and Chef. I hope this
video was helpful. Thanks for watching.